
# Related Objects

A [Controller] needs to specify related resources if changes to them is meant to trigger the [[reconciler]].

These relations are generally set up with [Controller::owns], but we will go through the different variants below.

## Owned Relation

The [Controller::owns] relation is the most straight-forward and most ubiquitous one. One object controls the lifecycle of a child object, and cleanup happens automatically via [ownerReferences].

```rust
let cmgs = Api::<ConfigMapGenerator>::all(client.clone());
let cms = Api::<ConfigMap>::all(client.clone());

Controller::new(cmgs, watcher::Config::default())
    .owns(cms, watcher::Config::default())
```

This [configmapgen example](https://github.com/kube-rs/kube-rs/blob/master/examples/configmapgen_controller.rs) uses one custom resource `ConfigMapGenerator` whose controller is in charge of the lifecycle of the child `ConfigMap`.

- What happens if we delete a `ConfigMapGenerator` instance here? Well, there will be a `ConfigMap` with [ownerReferences] matching the `ConfigMapGenerator` so Kubernetes will automatically cleanup the associated `ConfigMap`.
- What happens if we modify the **managed** `ConfigMap`? The Controller sees a change and associates the change with the owning `ConfigMapGenerator`, ultimately triggering a reconciliation of the root `ConfigMapGenerator`.

This relation relies on [ownerReferences] being created on the managed/owned objects for Kubernetes automatic cleanup, and the [Controller] relies on it for association with its owner.

## Watched Relations

The [Controller::watches] relation is for related Kubernetes objects **without** [ownerReferences], i.e. without a standard way for the controller to map the object to the root object. Thus, you need to define this mapper yourself:

```rust
let main = Api::<MainObj>::all(client);
let related = Api::<RelatedObject>::all(client);

let mapper = |obj: RelatedObject| {
    obj.spec.object_ref.map(|oref| {
        ReconcileRequest::from(oref)
    })
};

Controller::new(main, watcher::Config::default())
    .watches(related, watcher::Config::default(), mapper)
```
<!-- TODO: ReconcileRequest::from sets reason to Unknow, needs a method to set reason, ReconcileReason -> controller::Reason -->

In this case we are extracing an object reference from the spec of our object. Regardless of how you get the information, your mapper must return an iterator of [ObjectRef] for the root object(s) that must be reconciled as a result of the change.

As a theoretical example; every [HPA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) object bundles a scale ref to the workload, so you could use this to build a Controller for `Deployment` using HPA as a watched object.

## External Relations

It is possible to be dependent on some external api that you have semantically linked to your cluster, either as a managed resource or a source of information.

- If you want to populate an external API from a custom resource, you will want to use [finalizers] to ensure the api gets cleaned up on CRD deletion.
- If you want changes to the external API to trigger reconciliations, then you need to write some custom logic.

The current best way to do this is to inject reconciliation requests to the [Controller] using [Controller::reconcile_all_on].

<!-- TODO: maybe open an issue for Controller::external / suggest a way to call reconcile manually? -->

## Subsets

With owned and watched relations, it is not always necessary to watch the full space. Use [watcher::Config] to filter on the categories you want to reduce IO utilization:

```rust
let myobjects = Api::<MyObject>::all(client.clone());
let pods = Api::<Pod>::all(client.clone())

Controller::new(myobjects, watcher::Config::default())
    .owns(pods, watcher::Config::default().labels("managed-by=my-controller"))
```

## Summary

Depending on what type of child object and its relation with the main [[object]], you will need the following setup and cleanup:

| Child              | Controller relation  | Setup                  |  Cleanup          |
| ------------------ | -------------------- | ---------------------- | ----------------- |
| Kubernetes object  | Owned                | [Controller::owns]     | [ownerReferences] |
| Kubernetes object  | Related              | [Controller::watches]  | n/a               |
| External API       | Managed              | custom                 | [finalizers]      |
| External API       | Related              | custom                 | n/a               |

--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"
--8<-- "includes/links.md"

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[reconciler]: reconciler "The Reconciler"
[object]: object "The Object"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"
